Critical Thinking

Here at the Outreach Booth we are generally Agnostic-Atheists and
Secular Humanists and we are not trying to push our beliefs onto
visitors (unlike some) but we do try to get people to think.

We highly encourage "Critical Thinking" and outline it here.  Also see
the references at the end of this.

Critical Thinking is vitally important to everyone's lives
individually and all our lives collectively.  It helps us make better
decisions on medical treatments, on health practices, what we
buy or avoid, and much more.  It is key to effective scientific and
medical research and evaluations, for excellent detective and
intelligence work (FBI, CIA, Police, Lawyers, Judges, etc), and for
voting and sound elections - an informed public is essential to a
healthy democracy.

Critical Thinking is the process of analyzing information and forming
a judgment based on evidence, reasoning, questioning assumptions,
etc. It involves skills such as evaluating arguments, identifying
biases, and collecting information to make informed decisions.

Critical Thinking includes:

1) Following the evidence and updating our judgments based on it,
   always trying to find out what is really true.

   For example a detective may initially think a particular individual
   committed
   the crime under investigation, but if new evidence more strongly
   leads to someone else, the detective should update their
   theory of the crime and proceed on that path.

2) Recognizing that we all have biases, being consciously aware of
   them, and trying to compensate.

   Some biases can be emotional, but we are more likely to find the
   truth by using evidence, logic, and reason: the more rational
   aspects of our minds.

3) Being aware of informal logical fallacies and how to counter them.
  Two key ones are:

  3a) Straw man arguments.  A straw man argument is a logical fallacy
  where someone misrepresents or exaggerates an opponent's argument to
  make it easier to attack.

     A visitor may say that since we are Atheists we have no morals.
     But we respond with something like: No, Atheist means we don't
     believe in God but we do believe in good.
  
     For a visitor indicating that their belief in God is keeping them
     good (e.g. not killing people), then we'll respond that we're fine
     with them believing in God as long as they're good.  I don't
     think it's God that's doing that but their own sense of good.

  3b) Argument from Authority.  This fallacy occurs when someone
  claims that a statement is true simply because an authority figure
  said it, without providing any supporting evidence. This type of
  reasoning is considered fallacious when the authority cited is not a
  legitimate expert in the relevant field.
  

     Examples include celebrities, the bible (as a whole or particular
     passages), religious leaders, some social media influencers, and
     political figures.

     Religious leaders may be experts in a particular line of
     prophets, leaders, and bible passages but that is a circular
     argument without external evidence.

4) Be aware of the power of money and the biases it creates
        [See references 1, 2, and 3 for more]

     Some corporations do generally help people, but in a capitalistic
     society they are designed for, and are rewarded for, one thing:
     to make money.  Most are not trying to benefit people per se
     (in itself), but to provide goods and services that they can sell
     at a profit.  Like inhumane (but intelligent) machines.  And the
     CEOs support that, or are replaced.

     Examples of harm include:

      The tobacco industry continued advertising despite knowing the
      dangers of smoking by denying the link between cigarettes and
      cancer and using deceptive marketing tactics to mislead the
      public. They also engaged in legal battles and created confusion
      around health claims to protect their profits and maintain
      consumer interest.

      The Oil/Fossil Fuels Industry...

      Artificial Intelligence development may be beneficial in the
      long term but is likely to be disruptive and poses risks
      including discrimination, environmental harm, potential misuse
      in weapons or cyberattacks, spreading false information, and
      concentrating power unfairly.  Also Data Centers.
      
      Processed food production, and especially ultra-processed foods,
      are linked to various health issues such as obesity, diabetes,
      cardiovascular diseases, and even cancer.  [See reference 5]

         I grew up in the 1960s and watching early TV I saw many ads
         for children's breakfast cereals some of which I did eat, and
         liked, but I now consider unhealthy in various ways (due to
         high sugar, low fiber, etc).  What is healthier is minimally
         processed plant-based food, often referred to as a Whole Food
         Plant Based (WFPB) diet.

         Not everyone can, or wants to, eat a largely WFPB diet.  I
	 switched because cardio heart disease runs in my family, and
	 now I like WFPB food.  But, like exercise, if you're not
	 getting any WFPB food, then a little may help you a lot.

     Corporate (and company) money influences us in many ways, including:

      4a) Politics.  Making campaign contributions through
      Political Action Committees (PACs) and Super PACs, which can
      spend unlimited amounts to support or oppose candidates, thereby
      shaping policies that benefit their interests.

      4b) Advertising.  Using techniques such as emotional appeals,
      subliminal messaging, creating a sense of urgency, linking
      products to emotional or symbolic meanings, tailoring ads to
      viewers' attributes (especially on social media), etc.  It is
      estimated that we see 4,000 to 10,000 ads daily.

      4c) Pseudo-Science.  Funding studies that favor their products
      or interests, which can lead to biased results and the
      suppression of unfavorable findings. They may also manipulate
      how research is conducted and interpreted to create a distorted
      view of the evidence.

5) Social media, other media, "silos"
      [See references 1, 2, 3, and 6 below for more]

    Early TV was a unifying media since there were only a few channels
    and shows were designed to appeal to large segments of the
    population but now there are so many TV channels, streaming
    services, and social media systems that the media and information
    ecosystems are very fragmented and everyone is finding different
    information, often biased in one way or another.  It's important
    to be aware of this and be exposed to some on the other side.

    We don't know what text the various chatbots are trained on or
    what other information they might be using that is likely biased
    toward our individual preferences, since their main goal is to
    keep you engaged.  [See reference 6]
	
References: Other sources of information on Critical Thinking:

1) Podcast: The Skeptics Guide to the Universe
   Very interesting discussions of science news and evaluating events
   https://www.theskepticsguide.org/

2) Blog posts: Science Based Medicine
   Many Science and Pseudo-Science topics covered and evaluated, a very
     useful and interesting set of essays and references
   https://sciencebasedmedicine.org/

3) Book (400+ pages): The Skeptics' Guide to the Universe: How to Know
R   What's Really Real in a World Increasingly Full of Fake

   (These first 3 are all directed by Dr Steven Novella, MD)
   
4) A set of essays, research papers, and books
   By the Foundation for Critical Thinking
   https://www.criticalthinking.org/

5) Various essays and reports on Health
   Harvard Health Publishing, Harvard Medical School
   Under Health, subtopic Nutrition, they discuss plant-based diets
     Some include fish and certain dairy, and all include additional
        whole grains, fruits, vegetables, nuts, legumes, etc
   https://www.health.harvard.edu/

6) The basic AI tool: DuckDuckGo.com  "Search Assist"

   I recommend this for searching for information on any of these (and
   other) topics as it doesn't track you (it does anonymous searches
   for you) and the "Search Assist" will summarize information it
   finds and provide you with the one or two links to those pages.
   There is also a "duckduckgo" app on some platforms which is similar
   to duckduckgo.com.  Like others though, it can sometimes hallucinate,
   generating an answer when the links are vague.

7) Ground.News
   News Web site.  Aggregation service reducing political blind spots
   and providing access to different views.  Sites are rated on
   Left/Right scale so readers know the sources' leaning.
  - Wayne -  And the Outreach Booth team
